---
toc: false
comments: true
layout: post
description:
categories: [ppl]
title: Some rambly thoughts on probabilistic programming
---

Between having just come back from NeurIPS and met up with some of my old
labmates, and watching the [talks from PROBPROG 2018][probprog], I've gotten
into thinking about probabilistic programming again.

[probprog]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL_PW0E_Tf2qvXBEpl10Y39RULTN-ExzZQ

In particular I've been thinking about the design of probabilistic programming
frameworks, from the now popular deep-learning-focused ones such as [Pyro][pyro]
and [Tensorflow Probability][edward2], to a new project from my former lab,
[Gen][gen].

[pyro]: http://pyro.ai/
[tfp]: https://github.com/tensorflow/probability
[gen]: https://github.com/probcomp/Gen

Of course, my [M.Eng thesis][thesis] was on this topic. But looking back on it
now, the proposal in my thesis seems *way too complicated*. (I think part of it
is that I was anchored to the existing implementations of Venture in the lab,
which had a lot of complicated cruft in them.)

[thesis]: https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/113160

I want to revisit this and maybe eventually produce something that I can explain
to other people, but for now here are some scattered thoughts:

- In my thesis there was this whole section on traces with a monolithic
  interface that they should satisfy. I like Gen's approach better, where a
  trace is basically a plain data structure whose interpretation depends on the
  model program.
  
- In fact, I would go further. Probabilistically, there's nothing special about
  tracing; it's just a program transformation that turns a probabilistic program
  into a program that returns a trace data structure. This should simplify
  concepts a lot.
  
- I had this idea that stochastic procedures could have their own internal
  mutable state, to keep track of something like sufficient statistics. In
  hindsight it seems better for procedures to be stateless but allowed to mutate
  their inputs. You can still have a stateful procedure by making a closure.
  Note: mutation only plays well with inference algorithms if a mutating
  procedure knows how to run itself backward to undo what it did.
  
- Another source of complexity was for handling probabilistic programs that
  don't have a joint density, such as programs that call out to an external
  simulator. My current opinion is that this doesn't seem worth cluttering up
  the core interface for. You could work around this by, for example, tracing
  the external program's use of the random number generator and making a joint
  density out of that. (This is basically the approach in [Frank Wood's work
  with the physics simulator SHERPA][sherpa].)

- If the trace is just a data structure like in Gen, all the incremental graph
  stuff in Venture just becomes a data diffing problem. That's neat.
    
[sherpa]: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.07706.pdf

