---
toc: false
comments: true
layout: post
description: Instructions extremely specialized for my preferred setup.
categories: [linux]
title: Installing OCaml at home
---

I write OCaml code in my day job, where we've invested in a developer experience
that works out of the box with the right tools, compilers, and editor plugins.

To use OCaml at home, there's a bit more setup. I mostly followed the
instructions in [Real World Ocaml][rwo], but there were a couple places where it
seemed out of date and I ended up doing something different, so I've written up
what I did here.

[rwo]: https://dev.realworldocaml.org/install.html

I started by installing [opam][opam]. Since I run Arch Linux, I did this with
`pacman -S opam`.

[opam]: https://opam.ocaml.org/

I also enabled the [Spacemacs layer for OCaml][spacemacs].

[spacemacs]: https://github.com/syl20bnr/spacemacs/tree/master/layers/%2Blang/ocaml

Then, following the opam instructions, I initialized the package database and
installed some basic libraries and tools.

```
opam init
eval $(opam env)
opam install core utop merlin ocp-indent dune
```

One gotcha: `utop` depends on `lwt`, which fails to compile unless the system
library `libev` is installed. So I had to `pacman -S libev`.

At this point I realized that, since I was used to running everything from
Emacs, `eval $(opam env)` wouldn't do what I wanted since it only activates the
opam environment in my shell. After a bit of searching around, I arrived at this
elisp function to activate opam in Emacs.

```
(defun opam-env ()
  (interactive nil)
  (add-to-list 'exec-path (replace-regexp-in-string "\n\\'" "" (shell-command-to-string "opam config var bin")))
  (dolist (var (car (read-from-string (shell-command-to-string "opam env --sexp"))))
    (setenv (car var) (cadr var))))
```

I suppose I could've also run `eval $(opam env)` in a shell and then launched
Emacs from that shell, but this works for me.

Anyway, at this point I'm ready to start a coding project. Using [dune][dune]:

[dune]: https://dune.build/

```
dune init proj myproj --libs core
```

This generates a little project structure, and I can open up
`myproj/bin/main.ml` and start coding. To build the project, I run

```
dune build -w
```

which recompiles whenever I save.
